we have beliefs within us that are just
too hard to remove and they may have
come from traumatic experiences let's
learn how to put it in a box Professor
Steve Peters he's a world leading
psychiatrist the author of a number of
very influential books including the
chimp Paradox a man who has helped
multiple British athletes I've been
seeing Steve for three years now look
just any psychologist that's Dr Steve
Peters and the person who wants to help
people I started working with Chris Hoy
I went undercover to the Athens Olympics
so we could make sure that he got his
gold medal and running a Solomon the
emotion that that guy was getting at
that point was to being so unpleasant
that part way through a world
championship shook hands and walked out
so in Ronnie's case what do you do so
the very first step is oh really and
that is what winners do for people to
shift they've got to have psychological
mindedness which means they've got to
understand that it's not about what
happens to us in life it's how we deal
with it what role does Early Childhood
trauma play in how we respond in
situations and well now we're really
getting deep before we're even born the
emotional memory is starting to react to
that trauma your parent might suddenly
say are you just an idiot but something
might have happened just before that
where you've got one out of ten and you
were bottom of the spelling test and the
two together get emotionally Tangled and
that then damages the circus so you get
people often who are very low
self-esteem how does one go about
working with someone who's got serious
self-esteem issues I'm gonna be
controversially I'd say
whenever there's a podcast episode that
I record that really has a profound
impact on me I always want to provide a
little bit of a disclaimer at the start
to make sure that you give it a chance
and this is one of those episodes that
comes along once in a while which I
absolutely absolutely adore because of
the depth of wisdom and the potential it
offers to change your life so what I'm
going to ask you to do
is to listen to this episode to give it
a chance and to try and get to the end
because this is one of the rare ones
that once in a while I think will
genuinely change your life it'll be one
of those episodes that you pass around
to your friends
foreign
[Music]
how would you summarize your
professional academic
bio and experience
okay that's a tough starter uh I would
say that I'm a person who wants to help
people
so what I've done throughout life is in
order to help people what do I need so
one of the things I felt I needed when I
was a young man is I needed a medical
background
so all of the work I've done like in
Psychiatry and particularly becoming
consult psychiatrist it wasn't that I
wanted to be that it was I needed that
in order to be able to help people
effectively
so my experience in life has always been
the more people I can help and the more
circumstances the better equipped I'll
be to deal with whatever comes through
the door so I think of it slightly
different to be about a career it's more
of an approach and an objective in life
and then what I need to do is learn in
order to be good at that in terms of
your academic qualifications yeah what
are those
and pick my friends I'll laugh at this
because I've got five degrees so it
effectively
um I started off doing mathematics but
um and teaching but then I went back
into medicine and then from there their
scientific qualifications I've got
medical degree and then I went through
the Royal College so you specialize in
Psychiatry and get your membership exams
and then I've specialized again in
looking at things like um because I got
involved with sports people
um I did an MSC so that we look at
Sports Medicine itself again and brush
up on my medical background because I'm
still a doctor at heart and then because
I teach at University I did an MSC in a
medical education so I I sort of again
following what I've said as a theme I I
think what do I need and what would help
me to do this and then so that's why
I've collected these degrees
um so that that was my academic
background and then in terms of
experience what give me um an overview
of the sort of plethora of experience
you've had practically working with
people
um in different contexts in Industries
yeah I mean I went through a medical
training and then you do your routine
job so you mentioned surgery and so on
and our Trend in general practice and
then went into Psychiatry when I hit a
psychiatrist one of my disciplines
during training for GP from there in
Psychiatry you look across a vast
Spectrum you select your job so I
covered General adult psychiatry then I
covered old age Psychiatry a child
psychiatry learning disability and
adding into forensics so when you've
done all that kind of training
experience then you start to really
specialize and initially I was going
into specializing in old age Psychiatry
um I felt the the
um what the service at that time was a
long time ago was quite poor for old age
and there was very little research it's
before I received it so the
anti-dementia drug came out and uh I
wanted to go into that field but by
virtue of the fact I'm a teacher I got a
post in sort of teaching and University
alongside clinical work and that meant
really I need to do General adults so I
then set off in general adult psychiatry
I did a lot of clinical work 20 years in
the NHS but progressed because the
difficult cases are often personality
disorders and and how we manage them and
particularly forensic style so
Psychopathic clocally cold we'd call
them dysocial personality disorders how
do you manage these people so I ended up
becoming by default a specialist in this
field and then ended up working in a
secure Hospital working with people
under the mental health act to a
detained of transgressed the law so then
you go into the legal aspects of how we
deal with people who have transgressed
the law and are now held under the
mental Health act almost indefinitely
and you try and obviously get people
back out of these secure hospitals if
they're safe to come into the community
so that in a nutshell is how my career
develops so you end up with a vast
experience over the last 40 years and
then hopefully you can pull on that
experience when you're working with
everyday people
working with everyday people
um you ended up working in the field of
sports yes which seems less
obvious as a path for you to take based
on your um you know based on your
experience before that didn't seem like
you're really aiming intentionally at
working in Sports no not at all uh I'm
not a sports fan I'm a people fan which
means where people choose to work then I
follow them and I've got to learn their
world so
um obviously you've got Sports
Specialists Sports psychologists the
Specialists I come in a bit left field I
was in forensics at the time but I was
still teaching at University one of my
previous medical students I teach
medicine went as a doctor
um with a a cycling team that was
working for the Olympics so I knew
nothing about this and he called him
he's an excellent student but he wanted
an opinion on somebody who is a
professional who was struggling mentally
so I came in just to give an opinion and
work with this guy now I can only name
people who've you know gone public so I
can't give names and
um he excelled and then I can name the
next person at that point I was
introduced to Chris high and Chris an
amazing guy absolutely amazing so really
it wasn't easy I need a bit of work to
do to help him to get his mind to do
what he wanted to do with his mind uh he
went off I went undercover to the Athens
Olympics he asked me to go with him so
we could make sure that he got his gold
if I could contribute he got his gold
medal and then said really I want you in
the team so I didn't go off for a year
and after a year I was convinced I was
working Vicki Pendleton and I knew that
needed a bit more work and she's again
an amazing person a great people to work
with and so I then took the leap
um I mean at that point I said in
towards retirement then so that's well
over 20 years ago now and then from
there when I worked with them the
swimming team came in British swimming
and then it was just a I don't know a
Cascade of all the teams and sire
started working across the Olympic teams
and then went off to Beijing Olympics
and it just I don't know again momentum
and I I just got this reputation well
this guy can help you mentally
um you know so I work alongside the
cultures obviously they're the people
who take them to the front and I do the
mental side of it so it wasn't a planned
routine and I still do all my other work
I still work with the public I still
work in other areas with doctors with in
the NHS with the the police I've done a
lot of work with uh business people so
it it just became generic at that point
sir David brailsford who's been on this
podcast
um who was the performance director I
believe of the British cycling team took
over a time when it was struggling and
led it to become maybe the greatest
cycling team of all time he he says that
your appointment was the I quote the
best appointment
he's ever made
now when I think about
you know you getting that first call
from that first athlete the one you said
were struggling
um and then working with Chris hoy
what exactly are you doing for them
I think this is like no matter who comes
in the door say you come to me what I've
got says I'm not I'm not a sports
psychologist I'm not the specialist what
I am is a specialist in the human mind
so I've made that my career and so I
look at how the mind thinks how it
functions and I ask you to First be a
student really and I want you to learn
your unique mind I'm going to give you
the blueprint then together we're going
to work out how you perceive the world
perceive yourself perceive others what
do you want to do with your life when
we've done all of that then an only then
would ask to go into your world so then
we can apply what you've learned so it
was interesting that two people I work
with the public again were Vicki
Pendleton
um it was probably still the world's
most successful female Sprint on the
bike and then running a Solomon in snoka
and both were interviewed and they both
said that to the Press they said you
know he did not take us to sport he took
us to ourself and work with us as people
and so that we've gone in a good place
then we went to sport then he said right
what is it you're choosing to do with
your life and then I have to learn then
because obviously if you take me to your
world I don't know your world so I've
got to go in there and learn what it is
you're experiencing how you're
interpreting it it's a teamwork and then
I have to test things out so that's
basically what I did when I started
working with Chris hoy he asked him what
he was in wanting to do what was he
finding easy what was he finding
difficult and then try and work out what
I felt he needed to do and how he
managed his mind and then it keeps
pushing this point it is a skill you've
got to acquire it so I I don't have
other people might be able to do a
process I can't do that what I do is ask
you to work with me and try things out
where you're gaining a skill for example
a skill of recognizing where the emotion
is actually helpful or unhelpful whether
you can remove the emotion or need to
work with it or whether you can actually
just dismiss it and learn how to move
yourself on and so it's a skill to be
able to recognize things and then know
how to deal with that particular thing
that you're experiencing could you give
me a case study from one athlete you've
worked with
so that that will allow me to work
through that process so first
identifying the emotion potentially
working on whether it's positive or
negative how it's serving me and then
how you might with your process lead me
to a positive outcome productive well
I'm going to pick um Chris Hyatt and
Ronnie Sullivan on the grounds that both
of them are very public about working
with me and and they put out what I'm
about to talk about so when I was Chris
what he was saying he was doing the kilo
at the time which is four Laps on a bike
but it's very similar to doing 400
meters where you know you've got to get
the Judgment right if you go off too
fast you burn out and you won't finish
if you go off too slow you'll never get
the ground back so it's a really tough
really tough event
um so in the key law I had to learn that
um which wasn't too hard because I'm
familiar with 400 meters so and then
when I did that I have to test out what
his beliefs are you know when he sets
off on a bike where is he pulling his
focus and that's what Chris was saying
is when I set up on the bike my focus
can be distracted and it will drift off
and I might start thinking about what
other people have just done when I'm
watching my competitors or am I going
fast enough or and you start to do an
analysis now in his particular event
what I said to him is it's not going to
help you to do an analysis in this event
some sport it is because you have a
breathing space where you can analyze
and then get back into what I call
computer mode so he needs to program his
mind to have a fixed leg speed a fixed
markers on the track so that he's not
thinking at all there's no analysis that
was my summary of it so we tried that
out so when he went to the Olympics
everything was completely learning to
switch off any thinking and Analysis and
that's not easy easy said than done but
we practice this so on the holding Camp
which there's like a three-week camp
before the Olympics I went to the
holding camp in Newport Within and every
day we practice this so we do 20 minutes
of him learning to focus and then we had
specifics on the bike for when he got on
it to do this kilo
um and to me he was an excellent student
clearly he committed to it and he would
say then that when he got on the bike
and he went round the day of the
Olympics he forgot where he was until he
passed the line so to me that's like
even complete Focus mode so again credit
to Chris why is switching off his
mind in such a way or focusing his mind
in such a way okay why is that the
Neuroscience is complex so I'm going to
cut corners and do it very black and
white and simplified it's complex but in
a nutshell if you there are three
systems in your head keeping it very
simple it's much more complex than that
but simplifying it one of the systems
will hopefully to think very logically
and I call that the human system it
thinks logically but it's very slow
which means if you operate with a human
your body and your reflexes will slow
down because you're analyzing as you go
along and it slows the system so you're
more pensive so that's really good in
certain circumstances but it's awful in
fast-moving Sports
so if it goes into that it's very likely
he's slow down it's not going to help
him
if he goes into the second system which
will probably come back to the chimp
system this is a primitive system which
thinks it's more than just a reaction an
impulsive system it thinks when it moves
it can move at speed
but it thinks emotionally so this is the
part of his brain that will think
thoughts that are not helpful such as
should I go faster at this point and
then it may make a decision to go faster
and burn out so that would be crazy
um final the third system is a computer
it just needs programming the key to the
computer particularly in sports is it
moves so fast it's approximately 20
times quicker than the human system so
execute and it's about four times
quicker than the chimp system so if you
get into computer mode particularly fast
moving sports it doesn't analyze or
think it's automatic thinking so it
works with keys like a computer is that
the autopilot exactly it's an autopilot
you're programmed it's a behavior that's
programmed in but so when I came down
the stairs to see you today I I know the
route I've done it 100 times so I was I
was holding my iPad but I was on
autopilot yeah because I came down the
stairs and your body knows what to do
you don't need to think whereas if we
put an obstacle in there then it will
stop okay because it doesn't know what
to do it's not programmed okay but
you'll have to think man is is is the
computer where our habit
this habit formation yes all three do
work together yeah but the computer is
one that just blots out the other two or
if they go silent it can operate and
it's the computer that drives us to work
or like you say it goes on a familiar
track but it can also generate automatic
thinking okay so when you meet somebody
your chimp may start to think is this
person going to like me am I going to
come across okay it could give you
anything
um whereas the computer system is
automatic so if you've programmed a
belief that everybody loves me then it's
much more likely when you meet people
you're going to be very open
um and your body language will be
positive if you have I'm being severe
obviously if you ever believe nobody
likes me or I'm not as good as everyone
else which unfortunately a lot of
computers are programmed without then
whenever you meet someone you're on edge
and you're very conscious about what
you're saying and doing because you
figured that it's going to be the truth
that they don't like and you're trying
to overcome that belief which is so
unhelpful now that I call the gremlin
but these beliefs are programmed into us
and we hold thousands of beliefs often
without knowing what they are hmm
okay we're going to come back to that
because I want to talk about the gremlin
the trauma and where all of those
beliefs come from and how which ones we
can resolve but to your point then about
Chris Hoyle now so Chris was asking to
how do in in my world he was saying how
do I silence my human and chimp systems
from analyzing and thinking which is
their job and how do I go into computer
mode so I forget where I am and just get
on with the process and he did this
nicely Ronnie Sullivan wasn't in that
place and again Ronnie's giving me
permission he keeps saying tell
everybody everything but I won't tell
you everything a lot of stuff is behind
Nocturnals so he's a great guy I love
running Sullivan we've been friends now
for over 10 years so it's a privilege to
work with him it's one of the hardest
working of my students and and he's
saying to me all the time he Rings
regularly so I've spoken to him already
yesterday uh so we talk but the key to
Ronnie was his chimp was so active
in being anxious about how he came
across whether he'd perform well
um what people would say how well his
Rivals might be doing it was just giving
him what is natural and healthy but
extremely unhelpful and that was
creating very anxious moments so before
I met him I had a look because I didn't
know anything about Ronnie and or
snooker and I went online to say can I
see some YouTubes of him and I saw him
hitting uh the white ball with acoustic
and I thought well obviously that's not
the right thing to be doing and I saw
him walk out of a competition which
distressed me you know I didn't know the
guy but I thought wow the emotion that
that guy was getting at that point was
to being so unpleasant that part way
through a World Championships
competition he just suddenly stopped for
all the shook hands and walked out and I
just thought you know when I saw that I
definitely want to help this man and we
went back and actually looked at that
incident and I said what was it and I
love this
um and he challenged me at the beginning
but after about an hour of chatting he
said I get this because on that incident
he said to me there was this voice
sort of saying just go out of it you
don't have to be I don't want to be here
and he said and I'm saying to myself I
want to play snooker I just want to
enjoy the game and this voice got more
strong sin right hit the queue and he
said I hit the queue ball and he said
I'm walking out and the voice is still
going right just keep walking we're not
we're out of here I can't deal with this
um and he said now I get it there were
two of me
there was me trying to do what I want
and there's this voice which I couldn't
manage at all and I couldn't stop it
doing what I wanted to do so once I
explained the model to him
um and the model isn't everyone it's for
those who can relate to it he said I get
this because my human system my chimp
system are so different their poles
apart so he's worked for 10 years saying
how do I recognize and manage this chimp
system so when he came to me it wasn't
just in snow career his whole life
he could say that his emotions were
getting the better of him and it was a
whole system that was emotionally driven
and it was almost paranoid about things
it was Defensive it was making him feel
vulnerable it was giving him anxiety and
it's a really powerful system
so it varies in person to person some
people are very simple chimp systems
which are not that strong and others
most of us have chimp systems we we
really recognize they're there and they
they mean business and they give us
emotions which drive us to to do things
make decisions have behaviors that often
are destructive not just unconstructive
so in Ronnie's case what what do you do
right we started the game to recognize
the systems and say right let's just
start because again I try to take people
through a series of steps rather than
just throw things at them and so the
very first step is let's define Who You
Are and let's define what your chimp is
like so we recognize because you're
everyone's unique so I can't tell you
who you are know what your system is
I'll give you General things like this
system is impulsive it doesn't think
consequence it's quite emotionally
driven when we're tired it takes over
and people generally start I get that so
neuroscientifically that's what happens
in the brain so how do we start to
recognize the difference and then when
we do let's start simply to say what is
it that's prodding my chimp into action
and this is where it gets a little more
complex the chimp system can just react
so if I for example your friends with me
and one day I just shout at you for some
reason and get annoyed and your chimp
system is most likely going to show it
back but if it believes I'm not as good
as other people or I can't Co-op it's
likely to go quiet and feel very
intimidated and hurt
so again we have to work out what your
chimp system is doing but on the other
hand the chimp system the newer Sciences
it always turns to the computer and says
what beliefs do I hold before I make my
decision and this happens in a fifth of
a second so let's say you're about to
shout back at me and your chimp looks
into the computer and one of your
beliefs I don't know what they are might
be if you shout back up people it makes
you look foolish yeah well I can tell
you what my beliefs are right and I can
tell you where they came from so my my
parents shout where my my parents had a
very loud shouting relationship I've
never shouted in my life because of that
because I learned firsthand so whilst
you believe my belief is that
um shouting achieves nothing
um it's it's harmful for both parties
you lose when you do it you're not heard
when you do it
um uh no stop there so I can do that's
brilliant yeah so just to try and do the
steady with this is what you're saying
to me is I absolutely resonate with
these beliefs they're not something I've
given you which is a danger so if I said
to you uh where we want to try and stop
you shouting it never gets you anywhere
you have to resonate with that that's
why I can't do it you have to assist to
me Steve that really resonates I've got
to have evidence yes yeah and you have
to believe this and you can't brainwash
your Brit at seven to believing you've
got to experience it and say this Rings
true to me so once you've worked that
out and you reinforced it which it
sounds like you've done through your
life oh God yeah then you you don't
shout and it's not that you can't it's
your computer's stopping you because the
chimp has to listen to those beliefs so
before it does anything it can't move
so let's look at the opposite then if
someone had you know if someone grew up
in a household where they were shouting
and they and they for whatever reason
gained the evidence that it was an
effective way to communicate or whatever
um how does someone go about
unprogramming that belief well it's not
my job to do that and try to explain
what I mean I I agree with you to me
shouting is it's not very helpful you
know at all however if somebody that's
not my job to tell people I said to them
why why would you hold that belief and I
do have people who say it because people
don't listen unless you shout some
people you have to shout at them and so
I draw breath because obviously I'm not
agreeing but I'm not going to try and
change the mind I'm going to challenge
them and say can we challenge that to
make sure that's what you believe but if
they are insistent there are certain
people in my life that shouting works
for it's not for me to say that what I
would do then is say right let's say it
does work what that's in the short term
so now we're in the devil in the detail
our chimp system is working in the short
term it does not look at long-term
consequence
so when your human now comes in your
human system will look at rationality
what's the long-term consequence of
shouting now it may be with Personnel
there's no long-term consequence and you
think it doesn't make any difference I'm
going to shout right they get it and
we're okay with that and I'm not saying
that's wrong I'm saying it's what they
want to do however they might suddenly
say with me actually you're right with
person B when I shout there is
repercussion on the person and I'm
actually hurting them and also in their
eyes it's not it's demeaning they see me
as demeaning myself so it's not actually
working in the long term it's not
building a relationship that I want so
it can be you tease the devil in the
detail out you have a blanket by the
sound of it belief that it doesn't
matter who it is you don't shout yeah I
would agree with that however I'm going
to give you more devil in detail you
have to be careful because if you add on
to that that shouting
is something that's a failure and then
now I've I have a challenge on you
because if you think about it if you
then suddenly out of the blue did Shout
and you're going to now start beating
yourself up potentially and thinking
yeah I would yeah so that's not that
helpful so what a better belief I would
suggest and see if you resonate is to
say if you shout even though you don't
agree with it because all your beliefs
in my opinion are right uh if you shall
forgive yourself and say you know that
is a chimp system and maybe I need to
reinforce my computer system because my
chimp got out there and I'm not proud of
that because actually I don't think that
helped but I'd like people to understand
that we can only manage the chimp system
we do not control it and if it wants to
get the better of us it can
so all we can do is keep reinforcing the
computer beliefs and strengthen them and
you've done it beautifully by having a
number of beliefs and then you've almost
got this gang of autopilots yeah so if
one gets shaken the others come in and
that's how the brain will work so I like
more than one belief but on the other
hand if under circumstances your chimp
gets out and you shout I want you to
understand that your chimp got out it
wasn't you that's not an excuse model
you have to apologize if you think
you've done wrong but I am saying it's a
skill model which means you says to me
now I do not want to shout so you didn't
do it however you're responsible
you can't just absolve yourself so I
always liken it to having a dog I'm a
great dog lover if one of my dogs comes
in here and bites you I can't just go
with my dog the answer is I have to
manage this system I have to manage my
dog
and it's my responsibility 100.
so I work with people to say be kind to
yourself because this system means
business and whatever your system is
like it will break through there will be
does you do not manage it
Let's Pretend today has been a day where
I didn't manage it the dog got off the
lead and bit somebody whatever you know
my I I lost my temp or whatever and I
I'm reflecting on it thinking oh God you
know and I was passed and I'm thinking
God I wish I hadn't done that yeah what
what can I actively do to
prevent it happening again how do I
reinforce that computer let me go back
to the to the Dom because it's probably
the best example uh what you wouldn't do
I hope is kick the dog the dog's doing
what the dog does you know the dogs the
dog doesn't no so your job is to say
first I'm going to apologize to the
person
because that should not have happened I
know whatever I need to do or compensate
I do whatever and apologize the second
thing is naturally I assume you're going
to say well I need to work on the dog
I need to learn to train the dog and
manage it so I know exactly how to stop
that happening again but what I'm not
gonna do is beat myself up
for not being able to manage the dog why
is that a bad idea we're dating yourself
up yeah just like you know oh God I'm
such an idiot I shouldn't have done that
and it's sort of self-evident I mean
again this is the devil in the detail if
you said to me you know when I do that
it it makes me feel better just to think
right I've I've got to go up myself here
and there's nothing wrong with that but
what I'm going to do is draw a line
after a certain time
and then I'm going to say right you've
had to go at yourself get over it yeah
let's put that into action now
right then I'm not disapproving I think
it's self-evident that I'm not going to
prove for somebody beating themselves
and going back to the same thing over
and over and over and then escalating
that so it doesn't just become I can't
manage the dog I'm an incompetent person
you know and I get things wrong and
everyone else seems to do this what's
wrong with me that's the problem it's
now going down a very dangerous route is
that depositing certain evidence into
the computer about you not being
self-worthy which then is going to make
your chimp recipe yeah well the chimp's
gonna be irrational so when the chimp
brain takes over because it puts our
beliefs in as well as we do so it for
example the dog one it will expand on
that so there's something wrong with me
so let's go to you you shouted and then
you start saying you know I'm not a
great person
you know because my belief is great
people shouldn't be doing that and it's
okay giving an excuse and that's my
chimp but it's not good enough
and I can't allow it to happen again and
I've done damage to this person
irreparably and and now you can see how
it's starting to escalate and you're
putting all these beliefs inside your
system so they're going to be
unconscious beliefs that you're carrying
with you so then you go and meet some
friend and those beliefs might come
straight in am I going to damage this
person am I going to say something
stupid again I'm gonna lose it again
this is all really destructive and
unhelpful you know sometimes I find it
difficult to apologize
specifically you know when you're like
in the heat of a situation you might
have had a an argument with your partner
or whatever else about something tiny
yeah in that moment sometimes I find it
difficult to follow this I think I've
gotten 10x better I'm thinking about the
last sort of Confrontation I had with my
with my girlfriend and in fact all I did
was listen and then apologized after you
should finish speaking because I
genuinely was like I completely
understand
um but I think sometimes over the last
10 years I just think why didn't you
just what is it that's preventing you
from just saying especially when you
know you've you've done something which
is which isn't in line with who you want
to be or how you want to behave why
didn't I just apologize straight away
what is it I've got to make a guess
because I was like I said everyone's
unique so if I work in the or say well
again we're looking at what beliefs
you're holding is do you think
apologizing is something that's strong
or weak
good question
um
it's a good question and I think I'm
going to say that my belief on that has
changed okay so I think for the first
over the last 10 years the first eight
years I would have seen it as a weakness
and then in the context of my
relationship I see it as our biggest
strength that I can both now listen in
total silence make someone feel heard
and understood and then apologize to
them I think I see it as this like real
superpower that I have that I've
developed but in the in the eight years
where I didn't I don't feel like I was
apologizing enough I definitely saw it
as a a weakness I saw it as admitting
defeat and that's where I'm going so I'm
saying to you uh it's a shame it took
eight years yeah and that's why I like
to do this work because you look back
thinking if I'd learned this eight years
ago it would have made a big difference
but it that may not resonate some might
say well I don't get I don't see it as
weakness or strength so what difference
so I would try a different attack
consider that how important is it that
you're happy or that your partner's
Happy who would you put first
in the situations where I didn't
apologize I put myself first but what do
you want
I think in those situations I
I don't even know I want it to be right
I don't know I don't oh good good this
but I'll leave just finished on that bit
and I'll come back to the next one which
is where I think you're coming from
um I'll give you a surprise coming here
so if somebody said
my girlfriend's more important than me
I love this girl I don't want to lose
this girl and the last thing one is
upsetting her to it's easy to make an
apology yeah and it's easy to recognize
I don't want to hurt this person and
even if I'm in the right and she's in
the wrong it doesn't matter I'm not it's
not about winning which is what the
chimp brain does it wants to win okay
the human wants to resolve the situation
so saying I'm really sorry that you're
upset and I didn't mean to upset you
doesn't mean you're admitting fault or
whatever it just means you're trying to
say that you're more important than this
this is trivial
that's so true and so that might
resonate with people but you might get
somebody which is where you're going
where you say well of course I love it
but hang on that's not right because if
she's done something that's wrong and
I've reacted to that she created that
problem I know I'm wrong to react but
hang on I want an apology
right so that's common this is the
surprise when you look at the
Neuroscience behind this you think oh
that must be my human being rational
logical but actually isn't
when we look at this why a girl called
it the chimp system when we look at
chimpanzees they operate with the chimp
system they do have a human system but
it's quite primitive which is where I
got the analogy so I looked at the gray
tips back in the 1990s and the
publication came out in 2018 for the
people academic to show the chimpanzee
and human think very differently to the
other greater Apes we're very different
there's a different way of approaching
things and interpreting so we do have
the same system with chimps so that
chimp system is the same and the way it
works is unfairness so experiments with
chimpanzees I'm sure you find them on
YouTube where they do unfairness to
chimpanzees and even
um basic like capuchin monkeys
demonstrate the same thing they must
have fairness so never we demand
fairness we're actually operating from
the chimp system which is emotionally
based the human can accept unfairness
the human gets over and says get a life
you know stop trying to deal with trivia
and get fairness
but our chimp system demands fairness
I bought your book for uh one of my best
friends recently
when I say recently I mean in the last
seven days and I said make sure you read
that over the Christmas break and they
said they came to me and said do you
know the best part of the book for me
she absolutely loved the book she said
there was one sentence in it in the book
which made her go which is where you say
in the chin Paradox that life isn't fair
yeah and you actually I wrote it down
earlier on because because she said that
to me you you've referenced it as an
obvious thing you you say um
have realistic expectations and remind
yourself of the obvious life is not fair
stress will happen things will go wrong
for some reason that sentence resonated
with her really profoundly because
I think the friction she'd had in her
life was expecting fairness yeah and
that I'll pushed this I'm pushing the
next book now oh this is I mean this
one's a pass through the jungle is to me
is is a step up no it is the reason I
did that one was to try and this exactly
what I'm saying I threw all that lot out
as a chimp Paradox to say these are
Concepts and she's giving what I've
experienced doing talks over the last 20
years now to the public and and various
organizations is people come out of that
and everybody picks something different
it's what resonates with you so had I
been working one-to-one with her I do
this like fishing expedition to see
what's resonating and then we expand on
that so that's why I've gone into much
more detail on this next book to say
right if these bits resonate he's the
science behind at this time when
references you're gonna read it up but
if you don't he's the practicalities so
that's much more of an investigative how
do you use this now and what she's
really doing and I've tried to push this
in the next book is to say what she's
saying there is you know what my first
step is acceptance
and that is what winners do successful
people go you know it doesn't mean
acceptance roll over it means let me
start from what's in front of me and
stop fighting it and then work with it
and then see what I can do with it
whereas when you look at the chimp brain
which generally is not as successful can
be what it does is it says I don't want
what's in front of me I want it
different this is not what should happen
so it spends its time getting aggravated
rather than accepting and moving
straight into plan of action so we often
spend a lot of time agitating about
what's happened or what's in front of us
instead of saying it's happened one of
my favorite podcast episodes that I
recorded with a guy called Mo gauda he
said to me
um we're we're unhappy when our
expectations of how life should be going
are unmet hmm
well that's why when I've gone in that's
in the new book I've tried to say how do
these systems approach life
um what I've explained in that is the
chimp system writes the script first
before we leave the house so it will say
things like I'm going to drive to work
today and I'm going to get there in 30
minutes there'll be no hold UPS to be so
you can imagine the second there's
something in the way it explodes because
that's what it does it reacts whereas
the human system doesn't what the human
system goes out with zero expectation
but as hopes I hope to get them 30
minutes that's a world of difference and
then when I find there's a traffic jam
it doesn't react it responds so the two
systems are very different and if we can
learn how to go into human mode then we
set off for work there's a hold up we
don't have an emotional reaction we have
a response which is accept
there's the word accept what's in front
of me but then follow through with a
plan so in the book I always say first
step is accept but immediately say right
what's the plan because that's what
humans do the human system wants
Solutions it wants resolution it wants
to move on the chimp system wants to
express emulsion
and then remove the problem not solve it
there's a difference just remove it
ignore it displace it pretend it hasn't
happened that's not ideal because it
tends to come back and bite us how much
does what role does trauma play like
early childhood trauma play in how we
respond in situations and well now we're
really getting deep
um it depends on if again I'm being
black and white if someone has a really
bad trauma at childhood it can have
repercussions throughout life because
now the circuits in your brain are
developing so if you have a really
traumatic event and and not necessarily
how what we would Define as traumatic
it's what the child defines so I'm being
a bit facetious here for example if it's
got its favorite sweets and somebody
steals them
that could be a traumatic childhood
event at that moment in time the impact
was so significant that it has
repercussions it's damaging the circuits
it might for example perceive that as
nothing in life is safe anything I have
can be removed however most children get
over it in seconds you know but it
depends on the child and what stage
they're at and what the circumstances
are at that point somebody else might
have child abuse for example which is
much more likely to have repercussion
throughout life so but we'd still get
children who get child abuse and have no
repercussions so it isn't a definite
black and white it's probabilities
is it the way that I've come to
understand it is almost like we're
wearing our own sunglasses which is
a metaphor for like interpretation yeah
so me and my brother we could be
identical twins we go through the same
experience but we're wearing different
sunglasses so we interpret that
experience differently we deposit
evidence about what that experience
means into our computer yeah
um you're absolutely right and and it
all hangs on for example somebody like
your parent might suddenly say oh you're
just an idiot you know but something
might have happened just before that
where you've gone to school and you've
got one out of ten and you were bottom
of the spelling test and you've come
home and then your father you've done
something at home and made a mistake and
he says you're an idiot and the two
together get emotionally Tangled
and that then damages the circuits
whereas normally if you come home you
just got 9 out of 10 for the spelling
come top of the class and he says you
need you just bat it off and think well
I got 9 to 10. so therefore the brain
doesn't pick it up so again I'm trying
to give example it's so complicated what
I would say is it's hard to find these
because they happen often very young in
life and the emotional aspects and our
memories emotionally and how we
formulate things have about a three-year
start on the human circuit which doesn't
come in for three years approximately so
that's why we have no memories of
childhood we can't remember before the
age of two because it's not working so
our emotional memory begins in fatal
life so before we're even born the
emotional memory is starting to work out
what trauma is and react to that trauma
so we react to the mother's heartbeat
for example
um and again every fetus is different
it's on Spectrum and then we follow that
through and therefore the machine can be
damaged early in life it can be damaged
at any point and then we have something
which I've then tried to determine um
give a terminology of gram a goblin to
so Gremlin is a belief or an experience
you can process and actually get rid of
whereas a goblin is something which is
really damaged the circuits so you get
people often who have very low
self-esteem and that's going to continue
throughout life now I'm certainly not
saying we shouldn't try and get rid of
that generally we can but it could be
they always have moments of low
self-esteem and what they need to do is
accept they're always going to appear
but I'm going to have a way of dealing
with them and then going back onto a
much more positive footing so sometimes
we have beliefs within us that are just
too hard to remove and and they may have
come from traumatic experiences what I'm
saying is I'm not rolling over and
saying oh well this is damaged goods I'm
saying let's learn if they do raise
their heads let's learn how to put them
in a box stop them from having impact in
my life today and then work forward from
that and again that's a skill to do and
it just needs people to learn how to do
that so we can we can take down
gremlin's Gremlins but we can't goblins
you have to accept the reason I brought
that terminology is uh sadly I've seen
over the years when I've been in an
educational role as a doctor I've
trained doctors and clinical
psychologists nursing staff to how we
deal with emotions and what I've seen
distressed is when you get well-meaning
therapist of any kind
um and you they're trying to change
something that can't be changed and you
have to say you know the circuit's
damaged and rather than try and change
it let's learn to deal with it in a very
constructive way but not put that
pressure on the person to do something
which we're probably never going to
achieve so I'd always say try I'd always
say let's try and process an event and
let's try moving on so they remove it so
great if you can get rid of low
self-esteem but if it keeps raising its
head let's so stop putting pressure on
that person and work with it you still
try and remove it so but but there's a
point you said and look let's accept it
but let's not let it take over let's
learn how to put it in a box
so it's a bit like a virus in a computer
system exactly the same we accept its
damage but we can box it in
and if it does raise its head we mop it
up again
it's interesting because I from doing
this podcast I used to believe that your
traumas
um you know those early experiences that
Define you and the evidence it creates
could be all of them could be eradicated
with like some form of therapy or
treatment
The more I've done this podcast and sat
with exceptional people who have you
know have exceptional stories and some
in many cases have exceptional traumas
I've gone the other way and realized
that even if they've had all the therapy
they've gone and done Ayahuasca they've
had whatever they've had it's still the
some traumas some of the the deeper
earlier traumas never seem to disappear
and so my stance has changed and in
recent podcasts I've been saying that
there are instances where some things
just it seems like people just can't
overcome certain things is there a age
um
group where Goblins the traumas that we
can't seem to overcome the evidence or
whatever it is the the damage to the
circuitry is there a does it tend to
happen earlier yeah the younger we are
when we're developing the brain the
brain keeps developing up to the age of
around 30. so it's young to me at my age
as anyone under 30. okay so I'm 30 now
right you're you're just I'm still
you're just about done okay right so
some people finish we know that mature
is the final sort of like bits to the
brim mature which is actually the
rationality uh of the brain it matures
around 25 to 30 but there are quite a
lot of particularly more men who keep
going to around 32 but by then you're
out to the oven so wherever you've got
you finished I agree with what you're
saying is then you accept this is the
where my system is so let me manage my
system instead of trying to make my
system do something it can't do so I
hope I'm not coming across saying let's
roll over I'm not saying that but the
reason that I did it was it's they're
also the therapist it's really hard for
the doctor the nurse the psychologist
it's really hard to see them struggling
to try and change something or help
someone and it's not working and that
can damage them to think what's wrong
with me I've seen it yeah oh right there
you go and that's a therapist and I've
seen her crying yeah because she
couldn't change something right and
that's why I brought this out and said
to the therapist look stop you know
let's you review what you're doing uh
there are their own professionals but as
someone who tries to teach a therapists
and and people are working this field to
say neuroscientifically there are
damages to the Circuit so rather than
say we're going to change it you've
tried and you've probably done a great
job because again most people are really
good more therapists I've worked
alongside have been excellent you know
whatever the profession is is but don't
beat yourself up if you're struggling
with someone it may be you are hitting
the nail on the head but exactly what
you've just said we're not going to move
this person so stop worrying about it
and say let's try managing it first
whatever's raising its head and then if
we manage it then we might still try
processing but now we're not defeated I
have to say that that's that's great
advice for therapists but it's also just
great advice for someone in a family
unit or in a relationship who has a
partner or a loved one who is struggling
with something where the circuitry might
be irreparably damaged and they're
destroying the relationship with that
person because they're trying to change
them exactly and the devil is in the
detail again because there are other
elements to this because in other factor
is time we know that the brain will try
and repair itself even if emotional
scars it will try and do that so there
can sometimes just be time so we're not
liking growth reactions it you have to
allow the Britain time and the Brain
will process things in its own time and
that's a piece of string generally in a
serious loss or change of job or
relationship gone or you've lost someone
because they've passed on it usually we
say around three months is intense then
the 12 months is still bad but some
people it can be 10 years and and there
is no normal grief there's just normal
grief for you
and then if it gets stuck then again
this way the clinicians will come in if
you have pathological grief and this can
be due to anything it's often a belief
system again in the computer that's
stopping you being able to process
something
and on that point of low self-esteem
seems to be incredibly common yeah um
confidence issues low self-esteem people
believing like they are not enough I
remember I sat with a therapist called
Marissa pipia
do you know what Steve have I don't
think I've had a patient come to me that
believed they were enough whether
they're an Olympic star or they're a
business person at the heart of them
there was some kind of sort of deeper
self-esteem issue how does one go about
working with someone who's got you know
clearly
serious self-esteem issues confidence
issues I'm gonna be uh
almost paradoxical here and um
controversially almost so you know if
you look at the newer science of our
brain and what it's trying to do uh the
chimp system
is naturally and healthily low
self-esteemed that is the natural chimp
system and we see this not just in our
system and humans in chimpanzees so the
fear that they're not up to it is
inbuilt so if you have a fear that
you're not as good as other people and
you've got low self-esteem and then you
start searching for evidence and you'll
find it you'll find it because if you
compare yourself to anyone who's
excelling you've found it that is the
chimp system trying to help you it
sounds paradoxical what it's saying is
don't put yourself in a vulnerable place
where you beat your chest and say look
I'm strong because you could get
attacked it's better to keep your head
down wear a 10 helmet and hope it goes
away so that's how the chimp system
works nice if someone comes in with low
self-esteem the first step to me is
accept this is absolutely healthy and
natural but it's unhelpful
so it's it's natural and healthy so
celebrate you've got this amazingly
healthy machine but what it's giving you
is unhealthy
so what you say is well why would it
give me this and the answer is so that
you don't get shot down you don't put
your head up but that doesn't mean you
can't start saying right well what can I
do to gain self-esteem where it's
reasonable self-esteem
and then you start saying for example
don't compare yourself to others it's
not a healthy thing to do even wild
chimpanzees do this they have a
hierarchy in there they will compare and
they'll jostle for position so we're
built to do similar we jostled for
position and sport is one where we see
it blatant all right and we enjoy that
provided we retain a sport and not start
going self-esteem on it so we muddle the
two up and again instead the typical
everyday person social media yeah oh
that's a disaster area because again
what our chimps do is they want to be
loved by everybody oh gosh and and the
evidence is quite strong that if I am
your friend and I like you okay and then
you've got another friend who is not
keen on you at times and you'll actually
give more attention to the person who's
not keen on using me
and and that's what we do because our
chimp is best to say I've got beloved by
everyone so you just say well Steve
likes I'm not going to bother with him
but if it's Brian or whatever I'll I'll
try and Curry favor and you try and
please these people yeah and if you look
it's really unhealthy to do that and
it's not rational instead of saying let
me create a world uh because I'm not
going to work with my chimpses no I'm a
human which says I value my friends who
I want to invest in who do respect and
love me they're the people I'm getting
my time to and people who find me a bit
you know maybe not so good or don't like
me well that's up to them you know
they're not in my world they're outside
my world so if we look at that that's
how the human system works it builds its
own inner world and says this is how I'm
going to survive the world but social
media can be a disaster because then we
look to say well who doesn't like me and
what comments and we give them undue
attention
and that's a natural healthy thing for
your chimp to do when it's trying to get
everyone inside but it's a ridiculous
thing to do and it's unhealthy is that
because the chimp cares about status
yeah because in a troop a natural and
again not everything that chimpanzees in
the Wilder refer to us but some things
do overlap and we've found that a
chimpanzee will always try and Curry
favor with the powerful chimps because
it doesn't want excluding excluded chimp
is in trouble I mean it is going to die
because it's unlikely another troop will
take it
and it's a likely a leopard will get it
it's got to sleep sometime so but if you
think of us as humans we tend to see
this so he's particularly seeing
teenagers they try and make everybody
their Troop
so anyone who's rejecting is fearful and
to the chimp it's life and death so to
our inner system which is chimp driven
in the same way emotionally if we get
rejected it potentially we could be
kicked out and we know that if you look
at the Neuroscience of the brain
particularly in teenagers it's extremely
sensitive to peer pressure it's built at
that point to start forming peer groups
so if somebody says I don't like your
hairstyle I don't like your socks or
even worse that are like you then that
can be extremely damaging to the
circuits that can create damage so we
have to try and get to young children
and say right we need to teach them you
don't have to please everybody you
please people on your terms with your
morals and your values but you
self-assess you decide whether you're
good enough you decide what's important
to you but if we don't teach them at
young stage as a teenager we go outside
that and then social media becomes
extremely extremely dangerous you see
that in schools I went undercover in a
school and it was funny I was on the
playground and I was looking out and I
could I saw all of the boys had the same
haircut this kind of weird mullet thing
and all of them had the Under Armor
backpack yeah it was I couldn't believe
it I was like they are they they're
identical this group of 20 lads who are
all together perfect mullets and this
this under armor backpack I think at the
time when Anthony Joshua who was the the
great boxer
um was was an Under Armor Ambassador I
think the brand was becoming really cool
so
um and that made me think about how we
seek to conform so much at that age and
how much I did I was wearing the skinny
jeans if that was in the Fred Perry top
then I was listening to rap music and
then but I think that's that's really
important to do isn't it because again
if we got a child who under the age of
10 wandered away from parents and didn't
really care that's very disconcerting
will be able to build the community
right the child should be dependent on
the pair current right you know if
you've got a teenagers outside the peer
group we start getting concerned it
doesn't mean there's something
desperately wrong some people are more
isolate than others it's on a spectrum
but it is worrying so you like to see
teenagers together but in order to be
accepted you do have common ground
so we we all our chimps always look for
common ground or common experiences so
if I wear orange socks and now I'm the
gang leader then you wear orange socks
and now we're all on our own socks and
if I can decide they're out then
everyone starts wearing them that is
pretty healthy as a teenager because
they're peer group bonding we hope they
go through that stage into what we call
individualization so around 17
neuroscientific the brain does change
almost to the day for most people so by
1890 and we're starting to individualize
and that means we decide whether I want
to really wear orange socks we get
individual identities however again a
lot of research obviously it's
contradictory at times but most of it
shows that around that age we have the
leaders come out which is about one in
four people genetically are going to
individualize and decide I'm just going
to set my own agendas and I like what
music I like do what I like but about
three and four are semi-dependent
throughout their lives so they'll always
look to some strong figure to bond with
them and that tends to be a bit insecure
the people that have this low
self-esteem we talked about a second ago
are they more likely to become what we
call people Pleasers
yes because again they're trying to
Curry further so that's one way of
coping with low self-esteem so ever
again everyone's different so some
people might close themselves down and
they'll go into their own little world
and just not engage and they don't go
and join a new club or form a new hobby
or make new friends because they just
haven't got that confidence so they deal
the coping strategy is to just close
down and my my answer is if as long as
you're happy with that I'm not going to
dispute it but if you're not and you
want to get out let's get you out there
but everyone has different coping
strategies the next one you've mentioned
commonly is to try and please people
never say no always say yes
um make sure it doesn't matter how much
it puts you out never speak up don't be
assertive
is critical not to be assertive so this
is their chimp system saying if you do
all this people will like you more sadly
the reality is they don't people like
assertive confident people they don't
like people who suck up to them tends to
be then there's a real danger now I'm
going into forensics somebody's in that
position where they're desperate time to
plays is really vulnerable to abuse
so they're going to get someone who
finds them and then they'll use this
against them and then it really is
dangerous so so when you look at that my
gut feel is as well as logic would be to
get them out of that and say look be
very careful if you're gonna lean on
someone don't lean on them by trying to
please them lean on them as a friend
who's there to look after you that's
building you up not controlling you is
that what you tend to find in abusive
relationships yeah there's usually very
little self-esteem I mean years ago uh
when I did a lot of work in general
adult psychiatry in hospital medicine I
would see quite a lot not just women but
mainly women who would be have such low
self-esteem that they would subject
themselves to someone who was really
abusing them and there was a book out at
the time which I used to recommend I
just think Saxon written by a woman and
it was to entitle women who loved too
much I read through this book and I
thought she'd written it in my opinion
it was excellent so I used to hand them
that and say I think this is better than
me as a man trying to help you to get
self-esteem I can do this but I think if
you understand where she's coming from
and she said exactly what you're saying
she's saying you know the reason you're
clinging to these guys is because you
have so such low self-esteem you're
actually saying to them give me my
self-esteem and they're abusing you
so you've got to build your self-esteem
that's so you're right but there are
lots of ways people do some of them are
not so blatant so some people don't
recognize they've got low self-esteem
until you point out for example they
just don't know how to be assertive and
if you think about it if you've got
reasonable self-esteem then you would
say have the right to speak my mind and
also to say to people please don't do
that it offends mirror to upsets me and
this is what I'd like you to do which is
what assertiveness is
so again sometimes it's subtle that you
think oh wow low self-esteem presents
with different faces and again that's my
job to to help people to tease out and
think ah this is low self-esteem or it
isn't I want to figure out how to build
self-esteem but can self low self-esteem
also manifest as the
very apparently successful guy or girl
who has got a mansion and a Lamborghini
and his head to toe in designer Brands
because I know those people as well I
think at one point I was one of those
people if I'm being full disclosure but
um is that a form of low self-esteem
again it's what I put under was a public
coping strategy and what you're trying
to say is look if I keep elevating
myself then I'll suddenly feel good
because people see me as being this
wealthy person or this successful person
and it's interesting even within sport
one of the questions asked is why are
you doing this because it's great to do
sport I'm not a great sport
um but why are you doing it and and
often the answers which do lead to
success but can have consequence uh I
need to prove to myself that I can do
something and that's probably I would
have said not an ideal reason to do it
I'm not saying it doesn't work but I
think the long-term consequence is you
won't stop at the end of spot you'll
keep doing that
that's my the risk or someone who says I
need to demonstrate to other people how
good I am again these can be very
successful beliefs while you're in sport
but coming out of it it can lead to
Danger
so again it's not for me to say change
it's me to question it and say is there
an alternative way to succeeding Sport
and I've met plenty of people who say
it's only sport but I love it commit to
process and get on with it and succeed
fantastic and really great players
so again it's not for me to say it's for
me to try and tease it out to people I
think sometimes I think even with myself
I've wondered and worried that if the
the insecurities I had from being a
child you know with the only black
family in the neighborhood we were the
poor family with the smashed up house
um though that insecurity I think has
been a driving force for me I think it
was much the reason that I cared so much
about getting money and status and
material material success and then I
think there was a point I think I read
about this in my book where I pondered
that if I lose that do I lose my
ambition in my drive
well that's a good point it's
interesting that um
I'm sorry you experienced that oh no
because I don't sound great and again it
was a driving force that eventually LED
you to being successful in some sense
and so it's not all together negative
but there's a really key Point here it's
like when people have a driving force in
sport
I think it's great to have a driving
force where it is provided you can stop
in your tracks and look at perspective
and say you know what without this I'm
still a decent person and have good
self-esteem within yourself so I think
I'm not against these driving force as
long as you can contain them and they
don't continue yeah there's a difference
so I think if you said right I want to
try and prove that I commit this because
I'm from a poor family I'm black I'm the
only one in the neighborhood I'm going
to show you we can succeed here as
people in this position and that's true
of a lot of minor minority groups
I don't think it's ideal
I'd much rather if I'd met you then say
can you see yourself as being you yeah
and who cares what the rest of the world
thinks let's make you and your values
and that could have driven you but if
you say well what if I suddenly see
myself as being me and I don't see this
as me being poor and I need to prove
myself will not not lose my Force the
answer is not really your force is
driven by emotion at that point so
that's your trip driving you all right
which I'm not saying is right or wrong
I'm just saying that's what it's doing
but is there a way the human can drive
you and the answer is yes by your values
and saying I'd like to do things that I
think are really valuable to me and it
could be I want to earn money and I want
to help other people and I want a good
life there's nothing wrong with that I
don't think there's anything wrong but
that's for you to decide but then you
can have a driving force and you won't
lose it in sport I deal with people who
I try and get them to put sport in
perspective so my phrase is always is
tiddlywinks you know life is Tiddly
wings but let's do it with a passion
but at any point if we're not doing well
and we make a a bad move let's be able
to laugh and say it's totally Winks are
you doing that to detach it from their
self-esteem it doesn't yeah it doesn't
have to be with self-esteem that's
completely different to me you've chosen
to put your self-esteem on what you can
achieve which is what the chimp does or
who it is or how people perceive it or
what it's got what values valuables it's
got you know money that's and we're
dealing with it but it's not a very
sound one because what happens is you
still keep going
Because deep down what I've experienced
I don't know whether you'd resonate if I
met you at Heart to Heart behind locked
doors at that point you say I'm not
happy because I'm aware of what I'm
doing and I know it's superficial
and that's what I've experienced I've
worked with with the extremes of each
Spectrum with people who are struggling
with finances and people who are
extraordinarily wealthy but the bottom
line is at the end of the day when
you're back in your own house in your
own room you're living with yourself
and that's why I say do you want to look
at that because if you can live with
yourself comfortably and be at peace of
mind then nothing's going to get to you
the world will be a much better place
so when I think back to that time when I
feel like I was most driven by that
Pursuit which was
full
um before I had attained the things that
I was aiming to attain because I think
sometimes when you attain those things
they they act as pretty profound
evidence that you were you were aiming
for the wrong thing at some time but if
I look through the thing I think would
would make me unhappy was that all the
things I sacrificed because of my
Pursuit for like materials for money or
material success so not having
relationships or friendships or social
connection
sacrificing all of those things created
like an emptiness yeah you know just
working seven days a week in an office
not and then thinking that you know this
was the a noble cause because it would
make me Rich
it was actually the things that I well I
think it was the things that I
sacrificed that led me to feeling a
little bit empty inside I wouldn't
necessarily say I was unhappy but I was
definitely it was unsustainable for sure
I was definitely heading to a bad place
like I could see that coming I'd seen a
couple of my friends actually who were
doing the same thing at the time end up
in bad places on medication having panic
attacks
um drinking a lot of alcohol too much
alcohol
so I could see myself heading to a bad
place but um but I think again I don't
think we should see this black and white
things should agree again I'm not it
makes clear I'm not against people
earning money and I've been great
possessions and holidays and because
that will obviously give them some
pleasure and happiness I'm not because
I'm just saying alongside that let's
look at the other aspects which you're
neglecting yeah so do both
just get a perspective that that's going
to help me on my chimp to feel happy but
actually what's going to make me feel
good now some people will say I'm happy
I've got my money and I've got my car
and it's not for me to say oh wow what
about your values that's I'm not who am
I to do that what I'm saying is my
experience has been with a lot of people
I work with you're resonating with what
I find that behind locked dolls they're
saying there's an emptiness there's
something like saying I'm sacrificing
things that mean a lot to me and I want
these great friends and I want to have a
meaning in my life I want purpose I want
my values defining I want to be able to
live with my values and so I said to
people you just get a balance just tell
me what do you need what do you want and
let's get both of these things in
position you come to learn like I think
I thought that I didn't need those
things because I thought I was some
anomaly yeah I didn't think I needed the
like fundamentals of human needs so I
didn't think I needed connection I
thought all of these things but you
could take it or leave it but the longer
you run that experiment the this sooner
you'll find out that you two are human
but again if you try and give some
context to this when you're sort of 19
to 25 roughly you're generally searching
for a partner and your brain is telling
you look at your best yeah you know
otherwise you're not going to get
anybody so therefore you're wanting this
admiration you're wanting this status
and and that's because that's nature
driving you say if you're the best
that's who they'll pick they're not
going to pick someone who's not the best
right so we're driven and then we do
this comparison with other people uh
which can drive us on or it can cause
incredible depressive feelings and then
low self-esteem so again I think if we
can help people to understand that's
normal and healthy but it's unhealthy if
you do an address the rest so in saying
that we're not all going to look like
Tarzan on this world you know that's
what you're aiming to do then you're
going to fail because you'll obviously a
bigger thousand or a better Miss World
it doesn't matter and I think that can
be a faulty stance in life but it at
that age group you're meant to be doing
that whereas once you start going beyond
that either you've got a partner or you
start to realize it's a bit superficial
and so what you're doing is maturing
into the 30s not everyone most people
mature to thinking this is empty this is
not a good place to be and it's not
going to last and also you remember your
aging
so you know you look in the mirror and
suddenly think wow that wasn't what I
used to see and then if you're not wise
you start trying to be something you're
not so you're trying to get yourself 10
years younger and that can become an
embarrassment so again but it's up to
people what they want to do but I'm
saying the natural development of the
brain in the 30s is to mature you as
I've said it finishes now it really
matures and then in your 40s you do see
life differently so as you develop your
brain matures and it will see things
differently I always joke with people
and say you know when you're getting
middle-aged because you buy a bird table
and and you can't believe many people
resonate or you've got the garden center
on a Sunday but that doesn't mean you
can't do that at 19 and it doesn't mean
you have to do it at 40. I'm just saying
we recognize that what it's symbolizing
is I'm starting to look at more
Aesthetics in my life now and not
chasing after a mega career I'm not
chasing after wealth I'm saying look
there's a point where you've got enough
and there are other things is quality of
life now and for a lot of people they
start tuning into things like nature so
it's not that surprising they've got the
garden center you know I'm not saying
that negatively at all right I've got my
bird tail yeah we just put my
girlfriend's dad a bird there you go box
with a camera in it there you go but the
point is at this age more people are
more likely to appreciate that than when
you're 18. of course yeah but we're not
saying that you know I'm not trying to
put people in boxes I'm trying to say
let's look at how the brain develops but
learn what works for you but it's good
to know that your brain is maturing all
the time and you will move you will move
ground whether you like not your brain
will mature as well as your physical
body I've always I've always wondered
why at 23 24 years old I would go to
nightclubs and spend a ridiculous amount
of money on champagne bottles with
sparklers on them to try and impress
people whereas now in my 30 year old
mind I look at that behavior and go I
wouldn't even go like I don't even want
to go to nightclubs at all period
anymore but 23 24 year old Steve which
isn't that long ago it's only like six
years ago that's all I look forward to
that's all I wanted to do and it's funny
in just six years how my interest can
seem to be so profoundly different and
you know when I was 23 24 25 I always
thought about like older people like 30
40 50 year olds get why aren't they
coming to nightclubs like why aren't
they here that they don't know how to
have any fun that'll never happen to me
I will be in this club when I'm 45. and
I guess looking at the brain kind of
explains why that yeah and and there are
exceptions don't forget there are of
course yeah but it's even like with
music you know when you're taking a
generally it's a big feature in most
people's lives and in the 20s it is but
it starts to diminish yeah so you don't
find people in the 40s and 50s you can
but most people have moved on uh and
they say you think you're going to be
into music forever and then you suddenly
realize actually it's loud
and that's when you think oh my goodness
what's happening here
um but no I mean this is a natural
progression you know but then again I
love it if you get somebody who's in
their 60s 70s and still into pop music
that's great yeah you know I'm not
saying that's something wrong but I'm
saying there is a general Trend then
you're experiencing this so I think
pulling it back to where my world is
that's why I say the brain's doing the
same thing
so we go through these stages and we
mentioned about self-esteem which is
really important in the peer group
really important Unfortunately they get
self-esteem by comparison generally and
by admiration and possessions and then
as you get into your 20s we start to
change
and hopefully if people mature and start
tuning into their mind by the 30s and
40s we're matured enough to start
looking at our values and what's
important to us in our life such as
friendships
so if I'm 30 odd you know and I've got
low self-esteem I'm you know I'm 33 got
low self-esteem and I came to you where
would you begin with trying to help and
that low self-esteem was manifesting in
abusive relationships bad work
relationships
very negative sort of feelings about
myself and maybe even some impulsive
behaviors you know I'm I'm eating too
much around I don't know whatever where
would you start with me
okay the first I mean just so people say
oh wow that's a strange start but I'm a
doctor so the first is make sure you're
actually okay I'm okay because if
someone were uh presenting with this it
could be in depression if and that can
present in many ways typically it's low
mood and um loss of pleasure and
everything and loss of energy but that
doesn't have to be so I mustn't miss
that so I would make sure your mind is
not ill but I need treatment now we
assume that this is long-standing and
what you've done is you what you
describing is a lot of maladaptive
coping strategies so I eat too much uh
which is probably Comfort eating or it's
just habitual stuff that you're just not
you know or it could be got so low
self-esteem I've seen this you're almost
punishing yourself you know I don't
deserve to to eat well and I don't
deserve to eat the right things so I
deserve to be overweight or I deserve to
look like this so that could be the
bottom it so I have to start my starting
point is an exploration
but the key to this would be to move all
that to one side
if you're in a reasonable place where
you can actually communicate if not I'll
let you express it all it's important
you get it off your chest if you've got
it you say I don't need to do that what
I do is what I've seen the book here in
a passage jungle I explained the
starting point is get a blank piece of
paper and write down who you want to be
what behaviors do you want to have let's
define what you want not what you don't
want not what you're experiencing don't
start with a treacle I call that the
treacle start with a blank piece of
paper
and then write down the person you want
to be
do you want to be I want to be really
confident I want to have a a girlfriend
or a boyfriend I want to get married I
want to have kids I want to work out
every day I want to eat really good food
right so what you're describing now is
the human system the great news is when
I ask you the characteristics you've got
so I want to be calm I want to be happy
I want to be confident that is you
how do you know it's me right because if
we were we can't surgically remove
interference neuroscientific glitch we
can see unfunctional Marie scanners if
we remove the chimp and computer system
then you're completing control of
yourself so you would choose to be calm
you would choose to be confident so
therefore that's you the human system
can choose
what happens is when you choose to
become the chimp system interferes or
the computer interferes and throws shows
to the world someone who's not calm so
it's very important to recognize who you
are before we start so now we've got a
guy you're not going to write no one
ever acts anxious no no one they say no
what I want to be is calm collected a
good friend of Integrity that is you if
if we didn't have interference in the
machine so it's very crucial this is the
biggest point in the book the biggest
point is to Define yourself because now
you've got self-esteem can rise just on
that alone once you've grasped like you
say wow when I'm presenting the world is
interference it's not me if I didn't
have this machine I would not have
anxiety because that's a system that you
say in the human system can't do anxiety
it's not built to do that it's built to
be rational and calm but what it wants
to do and how I want to present is a
choice the chimp has no choice the
computer has no choice the computer is
programmed but these are interfering and
presenting to the world someone who is
not you
so it's very important to grasp that
concept that's my starting point now
we've grasped that we build on that
so now we I know who you are I'll say
this sometimes when you're with a friend
and you've been chatting a while and
maybe it's got late in the evening and
you've got a lot off your chest and
you've discussed you calm down
and sometimes the real you presents
and sudden you feel at peace people
often say I don't know it's just now
felt relaxed and thought I've got
perspective
I'll get gather the world to the way it
is I accept things are and I've calmed
down and then suddenly you see the real
person
and they've got morals and values and
not every human has sometimes The Chimps
the good guy some you know sometimes the
human's not nice so I do get people who
do not write for example who you are
they don't write compassion the don't
write Integrity they don't care
and if I challenge you you didn't put
compassion they say Adam not bother
about that
so I have to work out who you are
okay so not everyone is going to write
the same things that's why I know it's
you we're not just a generic list
because someone could just be virtually
signaling because you're asking me to do
it or because I want to be these people
but really I'm a I'm a burglar I'm a bad
guy you know I want to hurt people yeah
I'll tease that out how that's my job
because again then you look at evidence
base and you look at remorse you look at
whether somebody compensates for
mistakes there's a lot of things I want
to see the history here okay and then
I'll challenge that and challenge it so
that's a series of talks so often we
have a long time when we determine
someone to to explore this so we don't
get fooled is this you talk referencing
much of your psychiatric work here
within psych hospitals yeah
so somebody is psychopathic we generally
everyone's different version of what it
is for me a newer scientific we know
there's certain tracks in the brain that
are not really fully developed or don't
function uh and this produces someone
without empathy without remorse without
any conscience uh these are classic and
so I don't know that I'm not a mind
reader I can't tell until people talk
you know so yes they could deceive me
yeah I I have to just go on what they
tell me but I can listen carefully to
the words they use I can listen to what
they're saying and look at their past
life events and it starts to unravel
So eventually you think okay I know what
I'm dealing with now so but to be honest
people don't do that with me uh what you
tend is because I I would hopefully set
to scene where I don't care what you're
right I don't care what you want to do
with your life it's not for me I'm not a
judge I'm here as a doctor to explore
this with you and get insights for
yourself
so the most people are not Psychopathic
we're decent people who've just got lost
in the the word the new science of our
mind just tumbled us so what I stop my
starting point when you give me all this
was to say let's write out the real you
and let's start building ourselves on
that and recognizing what is not us and
let's start unpicking it so let's just
start saying right why would you have
and we went early about low self-esteem
let's look at why you have that first
it's natural and healthy that can help
people sometimes just saying that to go
that's amazing I feel better for knowing
it's natural and healthy maybe rubbish
and unhelpful but at least I know it's
healthy and there's not something wrong
with me
because the second you start saying oh
I'm trying to please people and I can't
say no and you see that as being a
weakness or a fault we're in trouble
again because you're muddling yourself
up with a machine
so that's my starting point who are you
what's the machine doing all of this
anything the chimp does anything it does
is natural there's nothing you're going
to give me even if it murders someone
that's what chimps do they're violent so
it it's still illegal and not acceptable
but I'm saying everything's natural so
that puts us on a different way of
looking at it
again to try and give context to that
natural isn't always good
um so overeating is natural but it's not
good and even like the classic one I
always use the parents and teenagers I
always say if you've got said it this
morning with someone if you've got a
teenager who's got a tidy bedroom that's
where I want to meet
if they're messy bedroom great that's
normal you know so you're more concerned
with teenagers that aren't being
teenagers so if this you've got a
teenager who never lies then it's a bit
worrying maybe they're good at deceit
because teenagers are learning to lie
and they're learning to defend
themselves and it's unnatural doing it
it's not health and the hope to the
grounds of it but you've got to say
what's natural and let's work with that
to minimize risk or whatever we want to
do
so there's a long-winded way of saying
you know get you to be yourself get your
machine Let's see what the machine's
doing and let's change the coping
strategies but accept the machine is the
machine quick one as some of you know
Intel are sponsoring this podcast and
for me Intel has made the search for a
premium laptop so much easier by
creating the Intel Evo platform which is
signified by this sticker here in the
corner laptop designs only receive the
Intel Evo badge when they have been
tested to pass Intel's own very strict
requirements so that they can actually
perform as you need them to out in the
real world and the result for me is a
premium laptop that can perform
everywhere even with my crazy schedule
in mind and most importantly it can
handle multiple tabs open and a battery
that really lasts throughout the
entirety of my meetings whenever you
need your laptop for intelivo have you
covered it's a game changer to find out
more and to get your hands on an Intel
Evo laptop go to intel.co.uk Evo and let
me know how you get on
it is that time of year again when my
life becomes incredibly reliant on Hill
I'm busier than ever I'm trying to be
nutritionally complete in all that I do
I'm trying to make sure I get all of the
vitamins and minerals that I need in my
diet and heal has been for the last
three and a half years the primary
reason as it relates to my diet that
I've been able to be nutritionally
complete while also being incredibly
productive I always find that when I'm
most busy when I'm most sort of sucked
into my work my diet Falls by the
wayside that's the trend that I've seen
in all of my life especially when I'm
stressed that's when I I end up
resorting to foods that aren't
nutritionally complete or healthy for me
having fuel on hand has been a game
changer not just for me I see it in my
team we have two heel fridges in this
building that we record the podcast in
um and it's become a crutch I guess a
health crutch a positive Health crutch
for all of our team thank you huel for
creating a product that has helped me
and help my health stay intact in my
busiest days over the last couple of
years
to the episode
do we do we choose what we believe could
I choose could I genuinely choose a
belief you know we talked to everyone
about how you can't just lie to yourself
and brainwash yourself to think of
something could I genuinely make myself
believe something if could I choose to
so could I choose to believe that you're
a spaghetti monster if the if my whole
life or my family was on the line could
I choose that belief no
no well others might argue no because
clearly you've given a good example it's
so ridiculous that you're brainwashing
yourself whereas when you look at
beliefs we have to look at
evidence-based so say what's your
experience in life and that will
formulate our belief or what's your
education so then with that said then I
can't use my I can't choose a belief
because my experience my evidence my
education but I couldn't you couldn't no
what you if we don't choose beliefs we
develop beliefs yeah we develop them but
we develop them on what we experience or
what education tells us if I say to your
research shows one in 200 people have
got Psychopathic brains then you look at
the research and go okay that's I
believe that research no you may dispute
it but if you have experience that blind
me about one in 200 people hurt me then
you've worked that out yourself so your
experience but you might get someone
who's really oblivious and lack of
insight and say I believe one in two
people hurt me and now you know you
think well can we challenge that and
let's see your experience but if it
reson nets for them it's not for me to
say well that's just rubbish that's
their experience
I'm really compelled by this idea of
whether we choose our beliefs or not
because I think that's this is at the
heart of a lot of these topics like
confidence and self-esteem you know
there's a lot of people out there that
say go look in the mirror and say nice
things to yourself in the mirror and
that will help you believe in yourself
okay I'm glad you're laughing I'm glad
you're laughing yeah it is silly isn't
it I think if you look in the mirror and
you say uh something that you don't
really like looking back uh I think then
you have to go down the road to say
right is it really that important what I
look like I can give you a good example
years and years and years ago I worked
with a young lady who didn't like what
she looked like she really didn't and
she was attractive in my opinion but I
think everyone's attractive and I could
there was no point me trying to convince
her I was a young doctor then and this
taught me and I couldn't get anywhere so
I was struggling and I eventually she
was in an inpatient we were worried
about self-harm and so on and that was a
coping strategy for having very low
self-esteem and I was lost
so as a junior doctor by chance I asked
her just chatting to try and get us to
see some value in her I said what'd you
like doing she said I love animals and
by chance we did have a bird table which
was neglected and we also had a cat on
the ward and no one really bothered with
a cat and I said can I ask you to do
something for me and this wasn't planned
it was I just thought can you look after
the bird table and can you look after
the cat and without a word a lie a
different person emerged and I sat there
and I thought why is that changed
because this isn't what you learned at
Medical School you learn antidepressants
and you know therapies and talk and I
thought what have I just done and I'm
young at that point to read around and I
like to read outside of medicine and I
thought I'd give her a purpose and that
was her self-esteem she took it out of
herself she then said doesn't matter
what I look like I want to help the
animals
and this is a true story that she got
discharged and went to work at an animal
center on a veteran outpatient's
follow-up and she was as happy as could
be and I said we've got to broach the
subject what about you know your
self-esteem and where you look and she
said well my self-esteem doesn't matter
because she actually did have it but it
was on I am a carer and these animals
need me so you could argue
psychodynamically she was looking after
herself by looking after the animals she
needed love so she gave love so I could
see psycho and I was saying there you go
I don't mind how it's interpreted it
worked for me it worked so I suddenly
thought wow sometimes people just need
to have a purpose in life and feel
valued and rather than what they look
like so that was the start of me really
starting to think as a young doctor you
know don't go down one route trying to
say things as being like a spectrum
another toolbox to say well hang on
let's stop looking in the mirror and
let's start looking outside yourself
because that could be the turning point
for you
so again that won't work for everyone
so I have to when you say about this I
probably get an idea now whenever
someone comes in I have to really work
hard to understand their mind what
beliefs they're holding what's going to
turn them around what's not helping what
are the long-term consequences what
hidden beliefs have they got that
they're not aware of I've got to get
them out and when I've done all that I
then go to work on it to help them to
challenge what we can both see has been
unhelpful and replace them in that
example of giving that young lady a a
bird box and the cat and then I heard
going working with animals and that
making her feel a sense of sort of
worthiness I guess yeah
I was thinking about that
if that job becomes gives her that sense
of worthiness just like the relationship
we've talked about and all these other
stimulants can that then become a
negative thing exactly any anything can
count it and this is why I'm saying that
when people say uh write me a book and I
think I'm always reluctant to do it and
it's took me 10 years to write this one
as in 10 years later after the first one
because I don't want to go in there with
a process but I feel I've got to because
you know so many people it's very
humbling have said this is so helped you
know it really makes sense to me that I
thought I've got to expand on it and
give it more details so people have
really can do it themselves but the
problem is it it's very individual so I
have to work with the individual and yes
that could become more positive for the
rest of her life
but as long as we can give a perspective
as well
that she's worthy as an individual but
if your value is I believe the value I
have is I want to be altruistic if that
is a value you hold and you're living
that value out by helping animals for
example then we know that that will give
you peace of mind
what I was what I'm alluding to there as
well is this workaholism yeah yes do I
keep helping more and more and that do I
work seven days a week and I can't leave
the bloody Animal Sanctuary exactly and
that's where you've got to get this
tiddlywinks but come out and get
perspective so say it right it's great
you're doing that but don't start making
it the more I do the better I am instead
of saying no I have to look after myself
too so again it isn't just one thing
we're giving it very sort of linear here
I'm just giving an example of one angle
but then I would work on the girl in
other areas of a life so it isn't just
that angle but the bottom line is if you
and I guess most people think this if
you live if you've defined your values
and you live by your values then you
become a wholesome person so it's it's
most people don't even know what their
values are so I pushed this point that I
think this is the only thing that I've
ever seen that gives peace of mind and
that's to live out your values but you
have to find them first and people
muddle up uh what's valuable and what's
value
they muddle them up so I tried to Define
that clearly so people know like let's
find your values and then let's start
measuring how you live those values out
because that it's not as easy as you
think so I give this as exercise in a
book to try and say work out your values
and then live them out but measure them
so again as an example let's say most
people put down respect respect for
others they like that that's a value I
really hold to and then when you say to
them well how would how would you
demonstrate that
people I don't know you know so I said
well let's look there are many ways you
can so for example one way you could
demonstrate respect is by listening to
someone
by thinking I want to get their point of
view because that's respectful not
judging them just listening I may not
agree but I'm going to listen
that is one thing you could do by
testing it weekly to say let me start
listening to people because that then at
the end of the day I think that was
respectful
I may not agree and I would be polite in
saying beer said if I don't agree but
I'm listening and I respect your view
so if that resonates if then that's one
way of measuring them being respectful
so I like people to do work with me
where we work on things like this
and then they get high self-esteem so
going back to the young lady if I did
that was her then she would say right so
caring for Animals is great it's
altruistic but actually I've got
something else now as well so exactly
what he said it doesn't become the devil
where I've gotta I've got to do this
every day otherwise I'm failing again uh
you get get it into context
has working with a patient ever made you
cry
yes
yeah I mean can you tell me about an
instance
I don't think I've ever cried in front
of a patient I'm pretty sure I haven't
but I think obviously I deal with
tragedies in life and they're painful so
in the room I I have to contain him or
if you look at the psych falling apart
but on the other hand you know I'm a
human being and you go away and you
think uh somebody for example horror
stories like some parents who's lost
their child that there's no way back you
know and my view which may be wrong is
that I say to people can we start by
your emotionally scarred this isn't
going to go away this is for life but
we're going to learn how we can cope
with it but you're not going to be the
same you cannot get over this so you
won't come to terms with it at all
you'll learn to manage it there's a
difference because I think yeah I'd love
it to you from parents to say I've come
to terms with it but that's really hard
my experience has been adorned so when I
leave the room and I think how am I
going to work for this man and woman
um and and get them to come to terms
with it I have to sort of this is only
where I work get inside the head and
that's so painful that it distresses me
I feel it then you think gee you know so
I do that with everyone I do it with
sports people I do it with the police I
do it with doctors I'll try and get in
their head and think what is their world
hopefully it's not that tragic but when
it's tragic tragic yeah it's painful so
it brings tears to me how do you deal
with that
um learn to recognize and talk to myself
you know which I do and so at the end of
the day I can't change life I can't
change things you know tragedies happen
uh and it's not going to be helpful for
me to dwell on it what is helpful is to
me to get inside the head and experience
the pain experience the feelings and
hopefully even the thoughts so that I
can then get outside of my head which I
think is a skill to do and actually then
say right what can I do about it because
then if it resonates with me it's
possibly going to resonate with the
person I'm working with so I go about
feeling it I know what I can say here
and try it but then I don't have this
approach where actually I'm not feeling
or experiencing what they've got this is
not for everyone I can hear a lot of
therapists going this is everything
you're taught not to do uh good on you
uh it's how I work and it works for me
I I've heard you in a path through the
jungle talk talk about what you just
said there which is you actually talk to
yourself yeah in the past through the
jungle you talk about talking to the
chimp yeah
yeah I mean again to lighten the mood
because it's quite heavy
um there's lots of great things I've had
and lots of great experience and not
success and and I said to people I was
packed yourself in the back when you do
this but one of the things my chimp
responds to it I don't know why he
responds to this uh is sarcasm that I've
worked that out so and ever something
upsets my chimp and I just think oh come
on get a life and I can't my chips going
for me I say to the chimp very quickly
right can I just ask do you want to be
upset for a minute an hour the rest of
our lives just give me a give me a help
I don't know why it makes me laugh so it
disowns my chimp and we know that if you
can laugh at yourself or a circumstance
you can't always but if you can uh we
know that's the only time the brain
seems to default into human mode
because what you're really doing if you
think the chimp's job is to alert us to
danger and worry where you start
laughing genuinely particularly yourself
The Chimps disarmed it has no job so it
goes silence it literally will silence
and you'll see the blood supply and
oxygen uptake in the human circuits and
so I come back to me and think okay
May Witter again but you know I'll deal
with it so yeah I talked to my chimp and
that I know what it what can bring me
around when you say talk dude you mean
out loud I wouldn't do that without
people around uh because I tried
upstairs all right yeah I felt like my
chimp had a little bit of a hold of me
about something and so I tried just
having a conversation with myself out
loud then it works and it works tell you
why this and again I'll both go through
this in detail for those of what the
science behind it is reference when
um when we talked ourselves
we talk often from the chimp we can talk
from the human but when we listen the
human process is what we hear which is
why often you know we talk to a friend
and we say I feel a lot better it's not
just getting it off your chest you're
listening so often in a team meeting and
business for example I'll sit and I'll
say just talk from your chimp and
they'll talk and talk and I say right
when you've got off your chest how much
do you believe without no go nothing is
rubbish because you're actually
processing what you're saying so the
more we talk out loud the more we
process from our human and bring
perspective in which the chimp can't do
we bring perspective and reality to the
table and that can bring us back to
Earth
so it does work so behind locked doors
yes I mean when I worked
um with British cycling which was great
at the time and my many Fantastic people
there great achievements when I used to
drive in for I live in the peak
districts it was an hour's drive and I
would literally on the morning say to my
chimp right before we get there don't
want your opinion don't want you to
interfere but when we come home I'll let
you talk don't ask me why it works
probably think I'm nuts but it worked my
brain almost went into computer mode
saying not the right time yet not the
right time so I would do with a lot of
upsets you can imagine working with
people you get a lot of all kinds of
things and then I would come home and at
a particularly Point entering the Peaks
where I'd say okay to your time and my
chip would come out and then I would let
it say well that was so unreasonable of
that person that was and once I've done
that as our chimps do you can't keep
going it used to get bored of its own
voice and until you're finished and it's
Yayo it's fine now so that won't work
for everyone you know but I'm just
saying sometimes it does work
uh I would just like to add because I
think I'm fairly resilient
um when we're not resilient sometimes
you got give TLC
so I'm not always phone with the chimps
sometimes I go you got a point
sometimes I agree with it and again this
is learning how to deal with you your
own emotions what works for you so I try
this with people and say what what
resonates with you you've got to try it
but sometimes after saving to my own gym
you've got good reason to be upset
you've got good reason to be distressed
you know I get it and that giving
yourself reassurance and TLC can be very
powerful
is that what you refer to as exercising
your chimp exercising the chimp is when
you let out emotion express yourself so
it doesn't have to be high emotion
expression can just be can I just say I
think what's just happened was
unreasonable I think this person was way
out of order or it can be without
emotion saying this person's just
damaged me you know or particularly
reputations of people are in other
people's hands and you see I see a lot
of this where you you've got
reputational damage and you can't do
anything about that because it's not in
your hands the more you try and defend
your reputation the worse it gets so you
have to just suck it up so there's where
I'd said be reasonable with your chimp
you know don't down it and say come on
get over it because it needs TLC
and there's lots of times lots of
circumstances TLC is appropriate
but you have to learn when to go enough
because it tips to self-pity
so we we exercise the chimp we let it
out let it out express emotion or
express feelings or express it in words
step two is as I read in the book is
then we figure out if it can be
addressed yeah
and say in the case of reputational
damage someone said something it's not
true it's out in the Press I can't
whatever you know I can't respond
whatever it might be then step three is
we make a plan to move forward yeah and
that can often be let's look at reality
here in the facts of the situation that
no but nobody is immune to attacks
nobody it doesn't matter you know I
often say if an angel from heaven fell
to Earth it would be attacked you know
and so you've got to get reality that
and then the reality is if you're not
going to please everyone uh and
something has terrible happened go to
your friends because that's all that
counts at the end
you know it took you with at the end of
the day and these are your friends your
partner potentially your family the
people that's done with that's why I
said the truth this is your fall back we
talked about earlier you turn to them
and they're then the ones who go we
don't care we know you who you are we
love you and even if you've made a
mistake they're forgiving
you know at the end of the day we're not
perfect human beings nobody's an angel
We're Not Angels we're human beings with
machines that can run as a right and
even though humans can get it wrong
sometimes it would be in the chimp it's
not it's the human you know that circuit
can do it irrationally you know it's not
always rational when it comes in you
must have dealt with this a lot dealing
with high performance athletes and
people in the public eye yeah yeah a lot
of teenagers because again that's a
vulnerable time but a lot of people so
it's a privilege to deal with it's
uncomfortable you know you deal with
actors actresses and deal with um Sports
people what about footballers have you
ever dealt with any footballers yeah I
worked at England football for three
years and I worked with Liverpool
for three years so I know a lot of the
lads went very public which was great
and again they were not in a bad place
when I met them what they were saying is
how to optimize performance and and
again they might deal with some really
bad comments in the press and which you
know behind locked doors I'm thinking
this isn't right that I don't think
they've got the right end of the stick
here you know and so all I can do is
stand with them and say look you know I
know the real person
you know I don't know what you're going
through and I can only give them my
support and sometimes that's all people
need they need somebody who's there for
them to say you know you're struggling
here but I'm here
and I know the truth we can't change a
falsehood or so otherwise someone
interprets you know we can't
so we have to recognize when we can't
change it we fall back to the troop and
say just give me some TLC or support
habits
a lot of people are thinking about
habits it's January
um I made a video on habits a couple of
couple of weeks ago um
in in a path through the jungle you talk
about how
our habits are influenced by our
self-image yeah that was a curious
sentence to read and not something I'd
heard before what do you mean by okay
there's lots of ways we form habits
um whether they're helpful or
destructive
um and I'm giving examples so that's one
you picked out that's quite powerfully
if you grasp it so for example
um I'll take the simple example which I
may have put in the book I don't
remember uh if I wrote down I'd say to
someone do you see yourself as someone
who is a tidy person who gets on with
things immediately or do you see
yourself as someone who procrastinates
and it's pretty untidy I'm untidy right
so if you've got that self-image and you
go home and your room is untidy I'm
being very black and white here then
there's no feelings at all because
that's who you are you're untidy that's
true so that if you don't do anything
that's true was if you say right change
your image and say actually my chimp
being tied I'm a tidy person
in some cases you're now programming the
computer you now go home and say wow
this isn't me
and that can change so if your
self-image is I'm not my chimp that's an
untidy little beggar I am actually a
tidy person how do I change that so far
well you've got to sit down and reflect
on this
um I mean a lot of the things in the
book I've done as a young doctor when I
became a psychiatrist I decided I didn't
want to be a psychiatrist didn't
actually manage themselves and that's no
detriment to psykes who struggle because
it's not an easy career or any any
therapist it's a tough career but I
decided look I'm going to work on me
because I can't keep doing this which is
where the chip model came from and it
was one of my light bulb moments many
many years ago where I would I would be
procrastinating and and then I suddenly
thought you know what that isn't who I
want to be
so I thought that isn't me I'm actually
similar gets on with things and I used
to get in and I'd just go right get on
with it and it's never left me I just
don't know that is who I am so I become
uncomfortable now if things were untidy
I agitate and think no get it tidied up
uh so I start perceiving myself as this
energized guy who's going to get up and
do stuff so if you define yourself image
you're actually programming your
computer say this is normal anything
else isn't and that will actually help
your chimp to agitate which will then
join forces and tidy the room
so instead of your chimp going oh I
can't be bothered suddenly it's saying
wow I'm being told we're not untidy so
this is unacceptable not normal
and that's what I did and I found that
very powerful in my life
so I get I get lots and lots of emails
the other thing I found really curious
in this section about habits in chapter
in stage four of the book is
um when people think about habit Loops
they often have a reward at the end of
it yeah you reference suffering now
there's this quote I heard many years
ago I think it was just over 10 years
ago it must have been God I'm getting
old
um where I heard this YouTuber say
change happens when the pain of staying
the same becomes greater than the pain
of making a change and when I'm thinking
about friends that I have in my life all
myself where there's habits or there's
Behavior patterns that that I want to
break sometimes I'm thinking about one
particular person who's um who's uh
who's a musician sometimes they have to
get to that Rock Bottom place before you
see change happen yeah is that because
of that is that because sometimes the
suffering has to yeah I mean it's just a
self-evident you know if you're for
example in a bad relationship and it's
really not doing any favors and it's not
doing them any favors but it's not bad
enough then you struggle along and
struggle along but if suddenly something
happens where it becomes untenable and
it's painful now then you move you think
stop the relationship and then you look
back thinking why didn't I move earlier
and the answer was because it wasn't
painful enough
and the same would like untied in US you
leave it and leave it and leave it and
then somebody comes in and says a
partner yeah fly me I can't live with
this and suddenly you think wow suddenly
it's painful is there a way to get there
without the person needing to point out
yeah there is I mean when I talk about
relationships are critical to us now I
say to people the way we move is we've
got to I have the triangle of change
which is really the three key things
that cause us to move and with the one
you've highlighted is either it's got a
massive reward or there's going to be
massive pain and suffering so if you're
trying to you want it you're courting
someone you want to form a permanent
relationship when they say I can't stand
untidiness you'll guarantee your Flat's
perfect when they come in right because
you're thinking if I don't I'm going to
lose this person so that the reward is
so big however that then they marry you
and for some reason we've tipped them
for granted and we forget that bit now
and then the flat becomes untidy and
then she starts saying to you you know
I'm struggling with this I'm struggling
but there's no right yeah so now it's
not painful enough so she's struggling
with it now I love the guy but this is
this is now what I do so I'll say let's
increase the pain I want you to sit down
and imagine
she can't call up and she's had a bad
day and someone at work says oh come
over and chat and this young man has a
tidy flat naturally and she goes oh wow
and I warn people how are you going to
feel if she walks because once they've
gone they've very rarely come back and
if you don't look after them someone
else will if you reflect on that that
can suddenly make reality come to life
to say I'm not there yet but blindly
this would be painful so I'm suddenly
gonna stop and think let me look after
them because if I don't somebody will
and we know unfortunately that happens a
lot and when you do ask interview people
say well why did you leave him or her
and they say I just got fed up with it
and there was no love or affection left
they didn't pay any attention they used
to
that's so common that's so common so you
can increase the concept of suffering by
reflecting and thinking what would like
be like if she left
so anyway I don't know you might say
it'd be better no no I was thinking
about how I need to tell you my my room
well no that's that's what I'm saying
now again it may not work for you you
might say to me I did that and he didn't
make any impact no it does I can
remember the last time my girlfriend I
saw her upset about something and I care
about this is I wanted to add in from
earlier on the reason why I think in the
last two years as I said I am I've been
able to listen to when we have
conversations and apologize straight
away is because I just love I love her
so much and I think about the last time
she raised an issue with me and she was
upset and she was talking to me she
never shouts like me I I was so scared
about like
losing her that there you go I I part of
my head she'll listen to this because
she's a big fan of yours she loves this
book by the way okay I I got it for her
after last time we spoke and she
absolutely loves it um
part of me was like
she was telling me how she feels I was
like oh my God she's gonna dump me oh my
God exactly I thought I was gonna lose
her I know it's not the case and it's
just just this irrational part of my
brain I think she's finished with you
and that really makes me go [__] I
need to immediately change it it was
we're having a conversation about
quality time and I hadn't given I hadn't
give spent much quality time with her
because I was so caught up in my work
so the minute she said that I was like
looking at my calendar and canceling
things yeah but I needed the warning it
seemed and that's what I'm trying to say
now there's there's this like the
devil's in the detail let's say that you
go home and you really make an effort
you tidy the house and you really clean
it up and she comes home and she doesn't
notice
there's a danger now and I do Advocate
that sometimes you say it to them
because your chimp needs to that get
that Accolade so it's no good not
helping it you don't need that but your
chimp does so it's worth saying can I
just say because I love you I've tied at
the flat because then your chimp goes
right good I get the Accolade now so I'm
not saying you should not jump out I'm
saying you should be getting the chimp
so it feels good and then hopefully
she'll say wow I love you too and I
appreciate that and then that's nicely
rounded up but you get you do get
circumstances where I'll work with
people say I tied to fly I didn't she
doesn't even recognize me a concert for
my dad she didn't recognize it and I
think well you know I'm not saying I'm a
goody goody but I'm saying let them know
because your trip saying please make
sure they know and they've recognized it
and again I don't know that maybe
couples where they say if I say that
she'll lose it so I said well don't do
it then tell me and I as a therapist
I'll say to you well done and that might
be enough for your chimp so again it's
that thing which I keep saying just Dave
I've got to work with the person in
front of me and the potentially their
partner or family and say well what
would they do before we make a plan
that was step one in your triangle which
is one yeah one of the points the other
two
um for people to shift they've got to
have psychological mindedness which
means they've got to understand that
it's not about what happens to us in
life it's how we deal with it that's
basically what we mean so we understand
that just because you've got certain
emotions don't doesn't mean you can't
change them and things have to change
our people have to change for you to
change it's within your power to be
responsible for the things you believe
and change so psychological mindedness
means you get up and start working on
this it's within your power to shift
things that's that personal
responsibility yes and also if you can't
shift them you know like say go back
let's say life hadn't been grit for you
and I'm sure you worked hard to get
where you've got but let's say you still
were in that poverty situation you
thought I didn't have the skill to do
what I'm doing I didn't use that skill
because it was never there so a lot of
people are trapped and they say well I'm
still living in a pretty bad place I'm
struggling financially and that's a lot
of people it's painful but again
psychological mindedness tough as it is
is to say well let me deal with that
I can't change it but I can change my
approach to it
and that's not easy I'm not saying
that's easy and then you have to work at
how do you do that and it'll be
different for different people
so psychological mindedness means take
responsibility accept what's in front of
you and then move forward
um so other than that what you do
non-psychological mind is where you
blame everybody else or Bloom
circumstances I said this happened to me
in childhood or these may all be genuine
but they're not actually helpful
disempowering right yeah yeah you're
using them as an excuse not to take
responsibility and turn them over and
whatever your power to something else
right yes
and you've got to get the power back and
say it's within my power why do people
like doing that why do people like
making excuses
um including me I have to say again it's
really difficult to I mean a lot of
people when they're in not a great place
find it very easy to be the victim
they don't want to be a victim but they
find it easy so they'll use an illness
as an example so that it gives them that
remit say well I'm not well I'm not well
when the reality is they don't know how
to move forward so it's easier to just
go not well and people then go well and
not well and there'll be some truth in
it but actually not fully the truth so
people often use as a defense mechanism
the victim role
sometimes they I have been a victim and
then they need to work through that and
process it but there's a danger you
start to use it or you start blooming
circumstance like you might have said to
me I didn't make it because my parents
never helped me well you know there are
people his parents don't help them but
they do make it so you have to say well
hang on don't use that because it'll
keep you in this not great place there
will be truth in it potentially and then
I will give the TLC and the recognition
that that didn't help but on the other
hand let's look at what he can do
regardless of the background I was
reading and I talked about something in
my my episode about habits that
there's something called the question
Behavior effect
where if someone is asked about
something they want to do so like let's
say I want to go to the gym if I'm asked
verbally by a friend they say you you
know are you going to go to the gym
people might say
um whatever they might say yes no they
might come up with an excuse as to why
they can't go today but when they're
asked on pen and paper or on a computer
and it's a yes or no answer if they
answer yes they are more likely to then
go to the gym and when I was reading
around the science as to where that is
they talked a lot about this this idea
of cognitive dissonance and we want to
right kind of interrupt you because what
you're giving me is exactly what you
said earlier about self-image right so
what you've affected on is the same
thing is when I take yes it means that's
the norm I go to the gym so the
cognitive distance if I don't go to the
gym that's not normal yeah that's
exactly the same as saying when I'm a
tidy person I come home I don't expect a
mess I tidy up immediately that the
cognitive dissonances I'm doing
something which doesn't tally with my
belief for people that don't understand
the term cognitive dissonance
it's doing something against your belief
system so if I say I'm a vegetarian and
then I eat meat
I'm now in turmoil it's like it's like a
mental friction because yes you're not
like your behavior doesn't align to who
you think the dissonance is doing one
thing which is opposed to what you're
saying or believing so I might say I'm
not someone who lies and then you come
to see me and I tell you a lie I go home
I'll have cognitive dissonance it's very
likely if I have a conscience uh which
most of us have that that will prey on
me and I think oh I don't like myself
for doing this this is wrong and then
I'll hopefully ring and say can I just
clear it so I'm not living out my values
so this is cognitive dissonance so I can
get why if you said are you going to go
to the gym and you take yes it's the
same principle I need to go because if I
don't I'm going to be in trouble I've
ticked yes interestingly when it's not
on pen and paper and when it's not a
binary choice of yes or no
um people are then less likely to go to
the gym because there's room for excuse
exactly exactly so I can go I'm gonna go
on Monday yeah and then like there's no
cognitive dissonance because I feel like
I've satisfied myself with an excuse
yeah and I'm nice and aligned
um
but yeah I found that really interesting
and I was talking to to in the episode
about how when you do want to set an
intention a great way of doing it is by
asking yourself a yes or no question and
doing it in some kind of binary way well
again it's why and again I recommend
this in not everyone but most people if
you're putting up something on a piece
of paper and measure things our chimp
Gets behind us now so it drives us to do
things so if we can see something being
measured and it's getting worse we tend
to do something about it
um and that's because the chimp doesn't
like to fail because it's ego is at risk
and as I said earlier when you we're
back in our conversation the chimp has
it it's about achievement it's about
self-esteem it's so it doesn't want to
fail
so the chimp Jones forces with us so one
way is to help yourselves get it on
board instead of seeing it negative is
the best friend your life is my best
friend my chimp is my best friend he
just needs a bit of help at times and he
does things different to me and I
usually say he's inept uh but that
doesn't mean I don't love him so I don't
dislike my chimp I just need to learn to
understand him and get him to help me
use his energy goals and I guess Health
trackers and those kind of things really
help to keep us because the chimp will
join forces with you and then that last
point in the in the Triangle right The
Habit triangle commitment yeah what I'm
saying with this is again teasing up the
Neuroscience if we go on motivation and
and again if people use it great right
but the evidence is that it doesn't
really help it doesn't really work it's
very hard to maintain
whereas if that's the chimp system so it
can work if your chimp is motivated
because the reward is so big their
motivation will follow that and be high
but we all know that I get a lot of
talks can you help motivate and I say no
not at all I don't want to do that
because you're constantly propping it up
um my Approach which is not as I said
not everyone will agree is if you look
at the site Neuroscience if you use
commitment that means I remove my
emotion and I plan on what I have to do
and I get on with it so commitment
there's a lot of evidence that that
makes us succeed so for example if I've
got to go and weed the garden it's not
my favorite pastime but I think right
you know the neighbors might complain I
don't have any neighbors but they might
so but and my Chip's gonna leave it who
cares there's any weeds and it's going
to kill you back and it but I would then
say it this I will right you stay in
here
I'm going out and if you want to join me
great but I'm I'm doing the garden
I remove emotion and I say what has to
be done is getting done and he's getting
done now we're not discussing it and I
will start motivation will follow
commitment and that means the chimp room
will then get behind me because by the
time we've done half the garden it'll
say I can't believe we've left it this
long that's a typical approach by the
chimp and then it tries to make me
finish now I might have to stop and say
let's respect my back now we'll stop now
so I manage my emotions by using
commitment and if they don't marry I
move them to one side so I don't really
work with emotion to drive me to do
something I think if people can use that
and they use motivation that's great my
experience has been it doesn't actually
hold the last point I want to talk to
you about is relationships we talked a
little bit about it there in the context
of my own relationship but one of the
sentences in a path through the jungle
is that
um I'm paraphrasing a little bit here is
that you need to have a good
relationship with yourself before you
try and have a relationship with someone
someone else now a lot of people that I
know and we talked a little bit about
abusive relationships will see another
party's being able to fix them in some
way
again this is shared degree so I'm not
saying definitively but as a golden rule
it's it's self-evident again if if
you're in a great place then you become
attractive to most people because you're
exuding this positive positivity and
energy and so if you can get yourself
where you respect and love yourself then
you've got a much better chance that
people are attracted to you and think
that's great however however
um I'm going to give you a bizarre
example many years ago I'll simplify
this
um I worked with a lady who had
um an overpowering desire to help others
and and I tried to say to her let's stop
and just get yourself and she couldn't
do this couldn't get in good place I
have to help others and it damaged all
the relationships you had because he was
overpowering and eventually
um I thought this is a great successes
many years ago and I I went really out
the box which is not recommended all
right but I just got to the point I
thought I can't see a way forward and I
said you know what why don't I help you
to pick the right person all right
because I thought this is more practical
Psychiatry and she laughed and said okay
let's try that because she said why do I
do it and she she went off to one of
these like this is a long time ago where
you wrought in it's not before the
internet and uh she got a group of guys
wrought to her and we picked one out I
said try him and she was in a great
place to work with me and said I must
stop doing this overpowering and learn
to manage myself uh and then she picked
this guy an absolutely worked fantastic
and I brought her in and I said I'd love
to meet him before I discharge from the
clinic because her steam was good then
it was more tragic than that she wasn't
in a great place at all because of this
so she was she I met this guy and I said
what's the best thing about and he said
because she mothers me and again it
taught me something to say you know
sometimes there's a positive
dysfunctional relationship and they were
very happy that he wanted this mothering
figure she was that both fulfilled what
they wanted to do so I felt at the time
was a amazing failure but looking back I
think yeah they were happy so it's not
for me to say what kind of relationships
people want I've given that as a bizarre
example the golden rule is I like people
to get in a good place within themselves
because otherwise what you do is you
start trying to use your partner to help
you to compensate for your deficiencies
or you start getting very dependent on
them or you start getting controlling of
them because you're not actually in a
good place yourself so that's the danger
with that kind of situation so I'm not
recommending what I thought was an
amusing though it taught me something
story I'm saying ideally in
relationships get to respect and love
yourself first and then when you've got
to that position then go out and find
someone because then they don't affect
you as much you can enjoy the
relationship rather than looking for
something out of them
so interesting
Steve
um thank you thank you so much you know
I I said this to you last time we spoke
but um you've helped several people that
are the closest people in my life of the
of the seven closest people in my life
you've profoundly helped two of them
with your work
um one of them who we talked about last
time was my business partner who's very
open about his relationship with um he
went through some difficulties and ended
up being in his words a functional
alcoholic and reading your book in his
own words was the changing the turning
point for him helped him to finally
understand his behavior pattern and in
fact he is the one my friend um Dom he's
the one who put me onto your work
because that book was so profound in his
life and then also I've got another
friend who um
who's the one that I gave your book to
recently who um reported to quote that
book really really really helped me and
I highlighted one of the sentences but
she managed to get through the whole
book so thank you for that because your
work helps so many people
um this is one of my top three favorite
books of all time because it's practical
because it's um because of the way that
it has these images which again I'm the
type of person that really loves imagery
in the way that I learn but also has the
robust sort of scientific knowledge from
your experience and I'm obsessed with
books that are centered in
human behavior in the human mind that
help us to understand it because as far
as I'm concerned that is all there is in
the world really that's everything that
stands in my way it's my troubles every
single day is is the human mind either
my own or someone else's so it's I feel
like this is a central reading for
everybody
um and that's why it's so great that
you're doing so much work in schools as
well
um thank you thank you thank you and
again you tell the two guys you've got
on your team that have done this you
know all I'm doing is presenting the
Neuroscience in what I think is an
accessible word that is is entertaining
but quite serious uh to try and get
people to get the newer science simplify
because it's out there but it's so
complex to me it's complex and I'd like
to present in a way that's practical and
that's what I've done but at the bottom
line is let them Pat themselves on the
back because
um I I work with lots of people those
who succeed have done it themselves all
I am is a catalyst so again anyone who's
really benefited they need to compliment
themselves because it means they've
worked and they've succeeded and it is a
skills for those who say well I didn't I
couldn't do it don't give up because uh
it is a skill and if this doesn't
resonate there's loads of stuff out
there I'm sure you've had a lot of
people in your program we're all in the
same boat we're trying to help people so
find something that does resonate so
that we have a nation with a much better
psychological Health that that would be
my dream
we've got a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves a question for the
next guest and the question that's been
left for you okay
if you were on your deathbed and could
leave only one lesson behind what would
it be
I would in the context of my scientific
background never
forget who you are
because that means you've removed the
Chimp on the computer and you found
yourself
so never forget who you are remember the
blank piece of paper
because that's going to give you the
self-esteem you deserve
Steve thank you
quick one as you might know crafted are
one of the sponsors of this podcast and
crafted are a jewelry brand and they
make really meaningful pieces of jewelry
and this piece by crafted when I put it
on for me it represents courage it
represents ambition it represents being
calm and loving and respectful and
nurturing while also being the
antithesis of that seemingly the
antithesis of that which is
um sometimes a little bit aggressive
with my goals and determined and
courageous and brave the really
wonderful thing about crafted jewelry is
it's super affordable it looks amazing
the pieces hold tremendous meaning and
they are really well made
hahaha
[Music]